DOCS-2494: Create custom ML training script, upload to registry, and submit training job (#3071)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/services/ml/upload-training-script.md

---
title: "Train a Model with a Custom Python Training Script"
linkTitle: "Use a Custom Training Script"
weight: 90
type: "docs"
tags: ["data management", "ml", "model training"]
description: "How to write and upload a custom machine learning model training script to the Viam registry and use it to submit training jobs."
no_service: true
# SME: Tahiya S.
---

> You can train your classification and object detection models on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), where the trained model is output as a TFLite model.
> See [Train a Model](/services/ml/train-model/) for more information.
> However, you can now also upload a custom training script to the [Viam registry](https://app.viam.com/registry/) to train your ML model with an output type of PyTorch, Tensorflow, TFLite, ONNX, or any other model artifacts.
> A flexible training interface like this allows you to upload any machine learning training code for your use-case.

Author: I'm not sure if the wording in the note would add more confusing because the process for that method is really different and you're not touching any code
```suggestion
Upload a custom training script to the [Viam registry](https://app.viam.com/registry/) to train your ML model with an output type of PyTorch, Tensorflow, TFLite, ONNX, or any other model artifacts.
This method allows you to upload any machine learning training code for your use-case.

{{< alert title="Note" color="note" >}}
For a lower-code approach, you can train your classification and object detection models on the [Viam app **DATA** page](https://app.viam.com), where the trained model is output as a TFLite model.
See [Train a Model](/services/ml/train-model/) for more information.
{{< /alert >}}
```
@npentrel Do you think this could work? Maybe with changing the phrase "lower code approach"

> You can train your classification and object detection models on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), where the trained model is output as a TFLite model.
> See [Train a Model](/services/ml/train-model/) for more information.
> However, you can now also upload a custom training script to the [Viam registry](https://app.viam.com/registry/) to train your ML model with an output type of PyTorch, Tensorflow, TFLite, ONNX, or any other model artifacts.
> A flexible training interface like this allows you to upload any machine learning training code for your use-case.

Reviewer: I don't like the focus on the output format. I don't think that's what this is about. This is a way to let you run any Machine Learning training. So you could give it sensor data and create a model on that in theory I think.

Also I think this overuses possessive pronouns, I think I commented that elsewhere. And where  possible "See ... for more information" shouldn't exist in favour of the link being on the relevant information.

```suggestion
You can create your own custom Python training script that trains ML models to your specifications using the Machine Learning framework of your choice (PyTorch, Tensorflow, TFLite, ONNX, or any other framework).
Once added to the [Viam registry](https://app.viam.com/registry/), you can use the training script to build models for your datasets.

{{< alert title="Note" color="note" >}}
For a lower-code approach, you can [train TFLite classification and object detection models]((/services/ml/train-model/)) on the [Viam app **DATA** page](https://app.viam.com).
{{< /alert >}}
```

> A flexible training interface like this allows you to upload any machine learning training code for your use-case.

Reviewer: @tahiyasalam maybe you can confirm that I am indeed understanding this correctly?

> A flexible training interface like this allows you to upload any machine learning training code for your use-case.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I'm following this thread completely, but you can train any type of model, not just classification or object detection, and the model can be any outputted format (e.g. PyTorch, ONNX, TensorFlow).

> A flexible training interface like this allows you to upload any machine learning training code for your use-case.

Author: ahh, what is --model-type cli flag used to indicate or set then?

> A flexible training interface like this allows you to upload any machine learning training code for your use-case.

Reviewer: I think that means my version of the copy works

Follow this guide to create, upload, and submit your Python script that loads a training dataset, trains an ML model, and produces a model artifact.

## Create a training script

> You must save your training script in the `tar.gz` format to run in the Viam ML training service.

Author: ah I meant it to introduce the section along with the second sentence but it does make more sentence as a later sentence

> You must save your training script in the `tar.gz` format to run in the Viam ML training service.
> Follow this guide to prepare a Python source distribution `tar.gz` file with the code for training your model.
> 
> ### Create entrypoint file <file>model/training.py</file>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

To start, create an entrypoint file that contains the main logic in a file called <file>training.py</file> in a folder called <file>model</file>.

> Add the following logic to your code in <file>training.py</file>:

Author: ```suggestion
Add the following logic to your code in <file>training.py</file>:
```

Add the following logic to your code in <file>training.py</file>:

{{%expand "Step 1: Parse command line inputs" %}}

This script must take as command line inputs a `dataset_file` and `model_output_directory`.
The `dataset_file` is a file containing the data and metadata for the training job and the `model_output_directory` is the location where the user-defined model artifacts (the TFLite, PyTorch, TF, ONNX files) produced from training are saved to.
Parse these arguments in your training script as follows:

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-line="364"}
# This parses the required args for running the training script.

> # You can use the data JSON to parse the images and

Reviewer: what does this mean? How would I used the data JSON to parse images and annotations? I think that needs to be a separate step

Author: yeah it is a separate step already the parsing classification and bbox helper functions that come next! Do you think this still needs to be clearer or if its ok as like an introduction as to why we're parsing these values? @npentrel

> # You can use the model directory for saving model artifacts

Author: same thing here this also just refers to another helper function that comes up

# You can use the model directory for saving model artifacts
# associated with the model name and version.
def parse_args():
    parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
    parser.add_argument("--dataset_file", dest="data_json", type=str)
    parser.add_argument("--model_output_directory", dest="model_dir", type=str)
    args = parser.parse_args()
    model_dir = args.model_dir
    data_json = args.data_json
    return model_dir, data_json
```

{{% /expand%}}
{{%expand "Step 2: Parse annotations from dataset file" %}}

> The `dataset_file` is a file generated by Viam containing the file path and annotations associated with the dataset ID on which the user is training.

Reviewer: Speak to the user. Is this copy pasted from somewhere?
```suggestion
The `dataset_file` is a file that the Viam platform will pass to the training script when you train an ML model with it.
The file will contain metadata from the dataset used for the training containing the file path for each data point and any annotations associated with the data.
The following shows examples for image data sets with bounding box labels and classification labels:
```

The annotations are formatted as follows:

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{"image_path": "/path/to/data/data1.jpeg", "bounding_box_annotations":[{"annotation_label":"blue_star","x_min_normalized":0.38175675675675674,"x_max_normalized":0.5101351351351351,"y_min_normalized":0.35585585585585583,"y_max_normalized":0.527027027027027}], "classification_annotations": [{"annotation_label": "blue_star"}]}
{"image_path": "/path/to/data/data2.jpeg", "bounding_box_annotations":[{"annotation_label":"blue_star","x_min_normalized":0.2939189189189189,"x_max_normalized":0.4594594594594595,"y_min_normalized":0.25225225225225223,"y_max_normalized":0.5495495495495496}], "classification_annotations": [{"annotation_label": "blue_star"}]}

> {"image_path": "/path/to/data/data3.jpeg", "bounding_box_annotations":[{"annotation_label":"blue_star","x_min_normalized":0.03557312252964427,"x_max_normalized":0.2015810276679842,"y_min_normalized":0.w30526315789473685,"y_max_normalized":0.5368421052631579}, {"annotation_label":"blue_square","x_min_normalized":0.039525691699604744,"x_max_normalized":0.2015810276679842,"y_min_normalized":0.2578947368421053,"y_max_normalized":0.5473684210526316}], "classification_annotations": [{"annotation_label": "blue_star"}, {"annotation_label": "blue_square"}]}

Reviewer 2: That was a typo

```

> With classification annotations like this:
> 
> ```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
> "classification_annotations": [{"annotation_label": "blue_star"}, {"annotation_label": "blue_square"}]}
> ```
> 
> And bounding box annotations looking like this:
> 
> ```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
> "bounding_box_annotations":[{"annotation_label":"blue_star","x_min_normalized":0.38175675675675674,"x_max_normalized":0.5101351351351351,"y_min_normalized":0.35585585585585583,"y_max_normalized":0.527027027027027}]
> ```

Reviewer: I don't think this is actually needed. If we want to make the above more legible by formatting it better that would be better
```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: That is a valid example. The full line will have some mix of classification annotation and bounding box annotations, but each annotation is formatted differently and likely only one of them would be used per training script

In your training script, you must parse the dataset file for the classification or bounding box annotations.
Use the following functions:

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-line="364"}

> # This is used for parsing the dataset file produced and stored in Viam,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# This is used for parsing the dataset file (produced and stored in Viam),
```

> # specifically for getting the label annotations

Reviewer: What does specifcially do here? It's not stored in viam specifically to get label annotations
```suggestion
# parse it to get the label annotations
```

def parse_filenames_and_labels_from_json(
    filename: str, all_labels: ty.List[str]
) -> ty.Tuple[ty.List[str], ty.List[str]]:
    """Load and parse JSON file to return image filenames and
    corresponding labels.
    Args:
        filename: JSONLines file containing filenames and labels
        all_labels: list of all labels present in dataset
    """
    image_filenames = []
    image_labels = []

    with open(filename, "rb") as f:
        for line in f:
            json_line = json.loads(line)
            image_filenames.append(json_line["image_path"])

            annotations = json_line["classification_annotations"]
            labels = []
            for annotation in annotations:
                if annotation["annotation_label"] in all_labels:
                    labels.append(annotation["annotation_label"])
            image_labels.append(labels)
    return image_filenames, image_labels

> # This is used for parsing the dataset file produced and stored in Viam
> # specifically for getting the bounding box annotations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Parse the dataset file (produced and stored in Viam) to get
# bounding box annotations
```

    image_filenames = []
    bbox_labels = []
    bbox_coords = []

    with open(filename, "rb") as f:
        for line in f:
            json_line = json.loads(line)
            image_filenames.append(json_line["image_path"])
            annotations = json_line["bounding_box_annotations"]
            labels = []
            coords = []
            for annotation in annotations:
                if annotation["annotation_label"] in all_labels:
                    labels.append(annotation["annotation_label"])
                    # Store coordinates in rel_yxyx format so that
                    # we can use the keras_cv function
                    coords.append(
                        [
                            annotation["y_min_normalized"],
                            annotation["x_min_normalized"],
                            annotation["y_max_normalized"],
                            annotation["x_max_normalized"],
                        ]
                    )
            bbox_labels.append(labels)
            bbox_coords.append(coords)
    return image_filenames, bbox_labels, bbox_coords
```

{{% /expand%}}
{{%expand "Step 3: Add logic to produce model artifact" %}}

> After reading in the dataset and preparing the data for training, you can add logic to build and compile the model and train the model on the data.

Reviewer: You have to - so makes no sense to say you can at that point
```suggestion
After reading in the dataset and preparing the data for training, add logic to build and compile the model using the data passed in through the data file.
```

> The code in this part of your script depends on the type of ML training you are doing.

Reviewer: It would be good to link to the logic from Tahiya's script as an example if it's publicly available

Author: done I think

{{% /expand%}}
{{%expand "Step 4: Save the model artifact the script produces" %}}

> You also need to include in your <file>training.py</file> logic to save the model artifact your training job produces to the `model_output_directory`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You also need to include logic in your <file>training.py</file> to save the model artifact your training job produces to the `model_output_directory`.
```

For example:

```python

> # This allows us to save the model artifact to Viam,
> # which will be viewable as a registry item for the ML model name
> # and version specified

Reviewer: Simplify
```suggestion
# Save the model artifact to the Viam registry using the provided 
# ML model name and version
```

def save_tflite_classification(
    model: Model,
    model_dir: str,
    model_name: str,
    target_shape: ty.Tuple[int, int, int],
) -> None:
    # Convert the model to tflite, with batch size 1
    # so the graph does not have dynamic-sized tensors.
    input = tf.keras.Input(target_shape, batch_size=1, dtype=tf.uint8)
    output = model(input, training=False)
    wrapped_model = tf.keras.Model(inputs=input, outputs=output)
    converter = tf.lite.TFLiteConverter.from_keras_model(wrapped_model)
    converter.target_spec.supported_ops = TFLITE_OPS
    tflite_model = converter.convert()

>     # Save the model to GCS

Reviewer: This may be storing it to GCS in the implementation details but that's not something the user would have to know
```suggestion
```

    filename = os.path.join(model_dir, f"{model_name}.tflite")
    with open(filename, "wb") as f:
        f.write(tflite_model)
```

{{% /expand%}}

### Package the training script as a <file>tar.gz</file> source distribution

> Follow the instructions to [create a <file>tar.gz</file> gzip'd tar file](https://docs.python.org/3.10/distutils/sourcedist) from your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must save your training script in the `tar.gz` format for it to run in the Viam ML training service.

Follow [these instructions to create a <file>tar.gz</file> gzip'd tar file](https://docs.python.org/3.10/distutils/sourcedist) from your project.
```

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}
You can reference the directory structure of this [example classification training script](https://app.viam.com/packages/e76d1b3b-0468-4efd-bb7f-fb1d2b352fcb/custom-training-classification/ml_training/latest/e76d1b3b-0468-4efd-bb7f-fb1d2b352fcb).
See <file>model/training.py</file> for an example entrypoint file.
{{% /alert %}}

## Upload a new training script or new version

> You must use the Viam CLI to upload your training script to the Registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must use the [Viam CLI](/cli/) to upload your training script to the Registry.
```

> You must use the Viam CLI to upload your training script to the Registry.
> You can use the [`viam training-script upload`](/cli/#training-script) command in the form `viam training-script upload --path=<path-to-tarball> --org-id=<your-org-id> --script-name=<name-for-script>` to upload a new script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must use the Viam CLI to upload your training script to the Registry.

To upload a training script us the [`viam training-script upload`](/cli/#training-script) command:

```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$" data-output="1-10"}
viam training-script upload --path=<path-to-tarball> --org-id=<your-org-id> --script-name=<name-for-script>
```

```

You can also simultaneously upload a training script and submit a training job with the [`viam train submit custom from-upload` command](/cli/#position-arguments-submit-custom).

> Follow the instructions in the [CLI documentation](/cli/) to install the CLI and formulate these commands.

Reviewer: "formulate these commands" doesn't really fit the friendly and not too colloquial but this comes across as stilted to me. In fact I think we can remove this and link to the CLI above instead.
```suggestion
```

Once uploaded, you can view the script by navigating to the [registry's **Training Scripts** page](https://app.viam.com/registry?type=Training+Script).

### Update the visibility of a training script

> To update the visibility of a training script, use the CLi's [`viam training-script update`](/cli/#training-script) command and set the `--visibility` flag to `public` or `private`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To update the visibility of a training script, use the CLI's [`viam training-script update`](/cli/#training-script) command and set the `--visibility` flag to `public` or `private`.
```

## Create a training script

Follow this guide to prepare a Python source distribution `tar.gz` file with the code for training your model.

### Create entrypoint file <file>model/training.py</file>

To start, create an entrypoint file that called <file>training.py</file> in a folder called <file>model</file>.
This file will contain the main logic for your training script.

Add the following logic to your code in <file>training.py</file>:

{{%expand "Step 1: Parse command line inputs" %}}

The script you are creating must take the following command line inputs:

- `dataset_file`: a file containing the data and metadata for the training job
- `model_output_directory`: the location where the produced model artifacts are saved to

Parse these arguments in your training script as follows:

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-line="364"}
# This parses the required args for running the training script.
# You can use the data JSON to parse the images and
# their annotations for the specified dataset.
# You can use the model directory for saving model artifacts

> # associated with the model name and version.

Author: sounds good

def parse_args():
    parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
    parser.add_argument("--dataset_file", dest="data_json", type=str)
    parser.add_argument("--model_output_directory", dest="model_dir", type=str)
    args = parser.parse_args()
    model_dir = args.model_dir
    data_json = args.data_json
    return model_dir, data_json
```

{{% /expand%}}
{{%expand "Step 2: Parse annotations from dataset file" %}}

The `dataset_file` is a file that the Viam platform will pass to the training script when you train an ML model with it.
The file will contain metadata from the dataset used for the training containing the file path for each data point and any annotations associated with the data.

> The following shows examples for image data sets with bounding box labels and classification labels:
> The annotations are formatted as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following show an example for an image data set with bounding box labels and classification labels:
```

{"image_path": "/path/to/data/data2.jpeg", "bounding_box_annotations":[{"annotation_label":"blue_star","x_min_normalized":0.2939189189189189,"x_max_normalized":0.4594594594594595,"y_min_normalized":0.25225225225225223,"y_max_normalized":0.5495495495495496}], "classification_annotations": [{"annotation_label": "blue_star"}]}
{"image_path": "/path/to/data/data3.jpeg", "bounding_box_annotations":[{"annotation_label":"blue_star","x_min_normalized":0.03557312252964427,"x_max_normalized":0.2015810276679842,"y_min_normalized":0.30526315789473685,"y_max_normalized":0.5368421052631579}, {"annotation_label":"blue_square","x_min_normalized":0.039525691699604744,"x_max_normalized":0.2015810276679842,"y_min_normalized":0.2578947368421053,"y_max_normalized":0.5473684210526316}], "classification_annotations": [{"annotation_label": "blue_star"}, {"annotation_label": "blue_square"}]}
```

With classification annotations like this:

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
"classification_annotations": [{"annotation_label": "blue_star"}, {"annotation_label": "blue_square"}]
```

And bounding box annotations looking like this:

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}

> "bounding_box_annotations":[{"annotation_label":"blue_star","x_min_normalized":0.38175675675675674,"x_max_normalized":0.5101351351351351,"y_min_normalized":0.35585585585585583,"y_max_normalized":0.527027027027027}]

Reviewer: I think it would be better to format the above json so that people can see the annotation more clearly. You can use highlighting on the interesting lines

---
title: "Train a Model with a Custom Python Training Script"
linkTitle: "Use a Custom Training Script"
weight: 90
type: "docs"
tags: ["data management", "ml", "model training"]
description: "How to write and upload a custom machine learning model training script to the Viam registry and use it to submit training jobs."
no_service: true
# SME: Tahiya S.
---

You can train your classification and object detection models on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), where the trained model is output as a TFLite model.
See [Train a Model](/services/ml/train-model/) for more information.
However, you can now also upload a custom training script to the [Viam registry](https://app.viam.com/registry/) to train your ML model with an output type of PyTorch, Tensorflow, TFLite, ONNX, or any other model artifacts.
A flexible training interface like this allows you to upload any machine learning training code for your use-case.

Follow this guide to create, upload, and submit a Python script that loads a training dataset, trains an ML model, and produces a model artifact.

## Create a training script

> Follow this guide to prepare a Python source distribution `tar.gz` file with the code for training your model.

Author: ```suggestion
Follow this guide to prepare a tarball with the Python code for training your model.
```

You must log in to the Viam app to download the package.
Unzip the package and see <file>model/training.py</file> for an example entrypoint file.
{{% /alert %}}

## Upload a new training script or new version

You must use the [Viam CLI](/cli/) to upload your training script to the Registry.
Follow the instructions in the [CLI documentation](/cli/) to install the CLI.

You can use the [`viam training-script upload`](/cli/#training-script) command in the form `viam training-script upload --path=<path-to-tar.gz> --org-id=<your-org-id> --script-name=<your-name-for-script>` to upload a new script.

For example:

```sh {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
viam training-script upload --path=<path-to-tar.gz> --org-id=<INSERT ORG ID> --script-name="MyCustomTrainingScript"
```

To find your organization's ID, navigate to your organization's **Settings** page in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com/).
Find **Organization ID** and click the copy icon.

Once uploaded, you can view the script by navigating to the [registry's **Training Scripts** page](https://app.viam.com/registry?type=Training+Script).

> You can also simultaneously upload a training script and submit a training job with the [`viam train submit custom from-upload` command](/cli/#position-arguments-submit-custom).

Author: right below but I realized I wrote from-upload here instread of with-upload...

## Submit a training job

You can use the Viam CLI's [`viam train submit`](/cli/#positional-arguments-submit) command to submit a training job.

Referencing the [CLI documentation](/cli/#positional-arguments-submit), use `viam train submit custom from-registry` to submit a training job from a training script already uploaded to the registry and `viam train submit custom from-upload` to upload a training script and submit a training job at the same time.

For example:

```sh {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
viam submit custom with-upload --dataset-id=<INSERT DATASET ID> --model-org-id=<INSERT ORG ID> --model-name="MyRegistryModel" --model-type="single_label_classification" --model-version="2" --version="1" --path=<path-to-tar.gz> --script-name="MyCustomTrainingScript"
```

> This command uploads a script called `"MyCustomTrainingScript"` to the registry under the specified organization and also submits a training job to that script with the input dataset, which generates a new version of the single-classification ML model `"MyRegistryModel"` and publishes that to the registry.

Reviewer 2: This is accurate! Both items will be private, but not sure if that's super important to include here

---
title: "Train a Model with a Custom Python Training Script"
linkTitle: "Use a Custom Training Script"
weight: 90
type: "docs"
tags: ["data management", "ml", "model training"]
description: "How to write and upload a custom machine learning model training script to the Viam registry and use it to submit training jobs."
no_service: true
# SME: Tahiya S.
---

You can train your classification and object detection models on the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), where the trained model is output as a TFLite model.
See [Train a Model](/services/ml/train-model/) for more information.
However, you can now also upload a custom training script to the [Viam registry](https://app.viam.com/registry/) to train your ML model with an output type of PyTorch, Tensorflow, TFLite, ONNX, or any other model artifacts.
A flexible training interface like this allows you to upload any machine learning training code for your use-case.

Follow this guide to create, upload, and submit a Python script that loads a training dataset, trains an ML model, and produces a model artifact.

## Create a training script

Follow this guide to prepare a tarball with the Python code for training your model.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> ### Create entrypoint file <file>model/training.py</file>

Author: ```suggestion
```

    "bounding_box_annotations":[
        {
            "annotation_label":"blue_star",
            "x_min_normalized":0.2939189189189189,
            "x_max_normalized":0.4594594594594595,
            "y_min_normalized":0.25225225225225223,
            "y_max_normalized":0.5495495495495496
        }],
    "classification_annotations": [
        {
            "annotation_label": "blue_star"
        }]
}

{
    "image_path": "/path/to/data/data3.jpeg",
    "bounding_box_annotations":[
        {
            "annotation_label":"blue_star",
            "x_min_normalized":0.03557312252964427,
            "x_max_normalized":0.2015810276679842,
            "y_min_normalized":0.30526315789473685,
            "y_max_normalized":0.5368421052631579
        },
        {
            "annotation_label":"blue_square",
            "x_min_normalized":0.039525691699604744,
            "x_max_normalized":0.2015810276679842,
            "y_min_normalized":0.2578947368421053,"y_max_normalized":0.5473684210526316
        }],
    "classification_annotations": [
        {
            "annotation_label": "blue_star"
        },
        {
            "annotation_label": "blue_square"
        }]
    }
```

> With classification annotations like this:

Reviewer: I don't know what happened with the comment on this but I was suggesting to remove these? Why do we need them in addition to the above?

Author: oh I think I asked Tahiya a question about the first example-- it doesn't make sense to me as to why there's both types of annotations at once in the first example when according to docs "If you want to train an image classifier, use image tags. For an object detector, use bounding boxes." 
is it valid dataset metadata?
she wanted to include the two types distinctly separate and also the example though I think @tahiyasalam

Reviewer 2: It is a valid dataset. We provide a dataset with all possible annotations and the user needs to parse the file and use the annotations that are relevant to them (classifications, bounding boxes, or neither). Since we are not managing the training for them, they need to do this themselves. It's helpful to see the two types, since they're formatted differently and need to be parsed differently (which is why I sent two parse functions originallt).

Reviewer: @sguequierre you might use the same dataset for two different training purposes. 

I think we should probably include both parse functions unless we can make one parse function that parses for both and returns an empty array or set for anything it didn't find.

Reviewer 2: I don't feel strongly about keeping them (the json bits) twice! I think originally it was difficult to read, but with the new formatting, it comes across as much clearer.

                    coords.append(
                        [
                            annotation["y_min_normalized"],
                            annotation["x_min_normalized"],
                            annotation["y_max_normalized"],
                            annotation["x_max_normalized"],
                        ]
                    )
            bbox_labels.append(labels)
            bbox_coords.append(coords)
    return image_filenames, bbox_labels, bbox_coords
```

{{% /expand%}}
{{%expand "Step 3: Add logic to produce model artifact" %}}

After reading in the dataset and preparing the data for training, add logic to build and compile the model using the data passed in through the data file.
The code in this part of your script depends on the type of ML training you are doing.

For example, you can reference the logic from <file>model/training.py</file> from this [example classification training script](https://app.viam.com/packages/e76d1b3b-0468-4efd-bb7f-fb1d2b352fcb/custom-training-classification/ml_training/latest/e76d1b3b-0468-4efd-bb7f-fb1d2b352fcb) that trains a classification model using TensorFlow and Keras.

> Here, the logic to build and compile the classification model looks like this:

Author: ```suggestion
The logic to build and compile the classification model looks like this:
```

You also need to include logic in your <file>training.py</file> to save the model artifact your training job produces to the `model_output_directory`.
For example:

```python
# Save the model artifact to the Viam registry using the provided
# ML model name and version
def save_tflite_classification(
    model: Model,
    model_dir: str,
    model_name: str,
    target_shape: ty.Tuple[int, int, int],
) -> None:
    # Convert the model to tflite, with batch size 1
    # so the graph does not have dynamic-sized tensors.
    input = tf.keras.Input(target_shape, batch_size=1, dtype=tf.uint8)
    output = model(input, training=False)
    wrapped_model = tf.keras.Model(inputs=input, outputs=output)
    converter = tf.lite.TFLiteConverter.from_keras_model(wrapped_model)
    converter.target_spec.supported_ops = TFLITE_OPS
    tflite_model = converter.convert()

    filename = os.path.join(model_dir, f"{model_name}.tflite")
    with open(filename, "wb") as f:
        f.write(tflite_model)
```

When you submit a training job with this training script, this function saves the model outputs to the `model_output_directory` in the cloud.

> Once the training job is complete, Viam looks at that directory and creates a package with all of the contents of the directory, creating or updating a registry item for the ML model.

Author: @tahiyasalam Am I understanding this correctly?

{{% /expand%}}

### Package the training script as a <file>tar.gz</file> source distribution

You must save your training script in the `tar.gz` format to run in the Viam ML training service.
Follow the instructions to [create a <file>tar.gz</file> gzip'd tar file](https://docs.python.org/3.10/distutils/sourcedist) from your project.

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}
You can reference the directory structure of this [example classification training script](https://app.viam.com/packages/e76d1b3b-0468-4efd-bb7f-fb1d2b352fcb/custom-training-classification/ml_training/latest/e76d1b3b-0468-4efd-bb7f-fb1d2b352fcb).
You must log in to the Viam app to download the package.
Unzip the package and see <file>model/training.py</file> for an example entrypoint file.
{{% /alert %}}

## Upload a new training script or new version

You must use the [Viam CLI](/cli/) to upload your training script to the Registry.

> Follow the instructions in the [CLI documentation](/cli/) to install the CLI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
If you are covering installing you'd then also need to cover authentication. I think this is such an advanced use case, we can assume they likely have the cli

Author: cool

You can use the [`viam training-script upload`](/cli/#training-script) command to upload a new script.

For example:

```sh {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
viam training-script upload --path=<path-to-tar.gz> --org-id=<INSERT ORG ID> --script-name="MyCustomTrainingScript"
```

To find your organization's ID, navigate to your organization's **Settings** page in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com/).
Find **Organization ID** and click the copy icon.

Once uploaded, you can view the script by navigating to the [registry's **Training Scripts** page](https://app.viam.com/registry?type=Training+Script).

> You can also simultaneously upload a training script and submit a training job with the [`viam train submit custom from-upload` command](/cli/#position-arguments-submit-custom).

Author: ```suggestion
You can also simultaneously upload a training script and submit a training job with the [`viam train submit custom with-upload` command](/cli/#position-arguments-submit-custom).
```

## Submit a training job

> You can use the Viam CLI's [`viam train submit`](/cli/#positional-arguments-submit) command to submit a training job.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> You can use the Viam CLI's [`viam train submit`](/cli/#positional-arguments-submit) command to submit a training job.

Author: After uploading the training script, you can run it by submitting a training job.

> You can use the Viam CLI's [`viam train submit`](/cli/#positional-arguments-submit) command to submit a training job.

Author: ```suggestion
After uploading the training script, you can run it by submitting a training job.
```

> Referencing the [CLI documentation](/cli/#positional-arguments-submit), use `viam train submit custom from-registry` to submit a training job from a training script already uploaded to the registry and `viam train submit custom from-upload` to upload a training script and submit a training job at the same time.

Reviewer: Merging this with the first sentence for brevity
```suggestion
You can use [`viam train submit custom from-registry`](/cli/#positional-arguments-submit) to submit a training job from a training script already uploaded to the registry or `viam train submit custom from-upload` to upload a training script and submit a training job at the same time.
```

```

This command submits a training job to the previously uploaded `"MyCustomTrainingScript"` with another input dataset, which trains `"MyRegistryModel"` and publishes that to the registry.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="with-upload" %}}

```sh {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
viam train submit custom with-upload --dataset-id=<INSERT DATASET ID> --model-org-id=<INSERT ORG ID> --model-name="MyRegistryModel" --model-type="single_label_classification" --model-version="2" --version="1" --path=<path-to-tar.gz> --script-name="MyCustomTrainingScript"
```

This command uploads a script called `"MyCustomTrainingScript"` to the registry under the specified organization and also submits a training job to that script with the input dataset, which generates a new version of the single-classification ML model `"MyRegistryModel"` and publishes that to the registry.

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

To find the dataset ID of a given dataset, go to the [**DATASETS** subtab](https://app.viam.com/data/datasets) of the **DATA** tab on the Viam app and select a dataset.

> Click **...** in the left-hand menu and click **Copy dataset ID**.

Reviewer: Still missing the next steps section?

Author: Sorry I've meant to do this for a bit but keep getting caught up in other feedback

Author: did not forget about it

---
title: "Train a Model with a Custom Python Training Script"
linkTitle: "Use a Custom Training Script"
weight: 90
type: "docs"
tags: ["data management", "ml", "model training"]
description: "How to write and upload a custom machine learning model training script to the Viam registry and use it to submit training jobs."
no_service: true
# SME: Tahiya S.
---

> You can upload a custom training script to the [Viam registry](https://app.viam.com/registry/) to train your ML model.

Reviewer: This is missing more of an introduction. I think we need to explain why you would be using it instead of the regular training flow.

Author: @tahiyasalam Would you be able to help provide any more context here-- why have customers been asking for this feature? Why would a regular user use it?

Reviewer 2: Here's a tidbit from [the scope](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nuqYF2tTx5fcYb7UaJTfKRJmGlA1jim3gF-dXdsw7YU/edit#heading=h.tcicyojyqi6c): Machine learning training is currently limited to classification and object detection, where the trained model is output as a TFLite model. A flexible training interface will allow more generic training by allowing users to upload any machine learning training code for their use-case. The model output type can be PyTorch, Tensorflow, TFLite, ONNX, or any other model artifacts.

Author: added

Follow this guide to create, upload, and submit your Python script that loads a training dataset, trains an ML model, and produces a model artifact.

## Create a training script

You must save your training script in the `tar.gz` format to run in the Viam ML training service.
Create a Python source distribution `tar.gz` file that contains all of the training code for training your model:

1. Include an entrypoint file that contains the main logic at a predetermined location like <file>model/training.py</file>.
   This script must take as command line inputs a `dataset_file` and `model_output_directory` and output the model artifacts it generates to the `model_output_directory`.

- The `dataset_file` is a file containing the GCS blob paths and annotations associated with the dataset ID on which the user is training.

> - The `model_output_directory` is the location where the user saves the model artifacts (the TFLite, PyTorch, TF, ONNX files) they produce from training.

Author: What does it mean by save "to Viam" or save "to GCS" here-- I can't tell what's happening from code besides that it looks like its saving the model locally (?) with f.write? @tahiyasalam

> - The `model_output_directory` is the location where the user saves the model artifacts (the TFLite, PyTorch, TF, ONNX files) they produce from training.

Reviewer 2: It's saving the model to the output directory that's parsed in the arguments. Then everything that's written to that directory converted into a package/registry item. That's what it means by save the model to Viam.

> - The `model_output_directory` is the location where the user saves the model artifacts (the TFLite, PyTorch, TF, ONNX files) they produce from training.

Author: sorry this might be a stupid question but where is the filesystem that the output directory is expected to be on? like is it the user's computer? @tahiyasalam

> - The `model_output_directory` is the location where the user saves the model artifacts (the TFLite, PyTorch, TF, ONNX files) they produce from training.

Reviewer 2: Not a stupid question. This script runs a training job in the cloud. So the user writes a training scripts, submits it, and then we run it in the cloud. In the backend, we provide a Viam produced dataset file and then a model output directory to the script; these are the arguments that the user needs to parse within their own training script. Then, the user can save the model outputs to this model output directory in the "cloud". (Similarly within the script, the user needs to parse the dataset file and then feed it into the model) Once the job is complete, Viam looks at that directory and creates a package and registry item with all of the contents of the directory. Then, the user can interact with the model artifacts in the registry (e.g. deploy the model). I feel like it would be helpful to have this information in the docs somewhere. Let me know if you have any questions or want to chat. As I've mentioned, happy to talk about this at any level since it's a complex project with a significant dev X component.

> - The `model_output_directory` is the location where the user saves the model artifacts (the TFLite, PyTorch, TF, ONNX files) they produce from training.

Author: ok, tried to update with some of this info-- lmk what you think

>   Parse these within your training script.

Author: Sounds good but do you have any more examples/guidance currently for minimally working example training a small model? I don't know what that would look like

>   Parse these within your training script.

Reviewer 2: That would be the most recent registry item (ML training script) I sent you on Friday. Please look through and let me know if that makes sense to you. It is in our viam-dev org in prod, so once it's ready, we can make it public for others to view.

    save_model_metrics_classification(
        loss_history,
        monitored_val,
        MODEL_DIR,
        model,
        test_dataset,
    )
    # Save labels.txt file
    save_labels(LABELS, MODEL_DIR)
    # Convert the model to tflite
    save_tflite_classification(
        model, MODEL_DIR, "beepboop", IMG_SIZE + (3,)
    )
```

{{% /expand%}}.

2. You must also include in your tarball a <file>setup.py</file> file with installation dependencies to install in the container that runs the training script.
   For example:

{{%expand "Click to view example setup.py" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
from setuptools import find_packages, setup

setup(
    name="training",
    version="0.1",
    packages=find_packages(),
    include_package_data=True,
    install_requires=[
        "google-cloud-aiplatform",
        "google-cloud-storage",
        "keras==2.11.0",
        "keras-cv==0.5.0",
        "Keras-Preprocessing==1.1.2",
        "tflite-support",
    ],
)
```

{{% /expand%}}

3. Follow the instructions to [create a `tar.gz` gzip'd tar file from your files](https://docs.python.org/3.10/distutils/sourcedist).

> You can reference the directory structure of this [example classification training script](https://app.viam.dev/packages/0fbe951e-d4c6-427f-985f-784b7b85842c/manual_testing_byots_classification/ml_training/latest/0fbe951e-d4c6-427f-985f-784b7b85842c).

Author: Fixed!

When you submit a training job with this training script, this function saves the model outputs to the `model_output_directory` in the cloud.
Once the training job is complete, Viam looks at that directory and creates a package with all of the contents of the directory, creating or updating a registry item for the ML model.

{{% /expand%}}
{{%expand "Step 4: Write main function" %}}

Now, write all the code that runs the training job invoking the previously defined helper functions.
Write this into the top level code of <file>training.py</file>, which is executed when the file runs as a script.

> For example, for the [example classification training script](https://app.viam.com/packages/e76d1b3b-0468-4efd-bb7f-fb1d2b352fcb/custom-training-classification/ml_training/latest/e76d1b3b-0468-4efd-bb7f-fb1d2b352fcb) that trains a classification model using TensorFlow and Keras, `__main__` looks like this:

Reviewer: [nit]: removing the duplication of for (...) example 😂
```suggestion
For the [example classification training script](https://app.viam.com/packages/e76d1b3b-0468-4efd-bb7f-fb1d2b352fcb/custom-training-classification/ml_training/latest/e76d1b3b-0468-4efd-bb7f-fb1d2b352fcb) that trains a classification model using TensorFlow and Keras, `__main__` looks like this:
```
